DOTS AND BOXES

Authors: Hemanth Sai Nimmala, Satya Sudheera Vytla

Game:
We are planning to build ‘Dots and Boxes’ game. Dots and Boxes is a multiplayer game which needs a minimum of 2 players. It is typically a pencil-paper game that requires no additional setup. It is a quick and easy to learn game while involving strategic mind play to win. The game begins with a grid of unconnected dots. Each player take turns to join the unconnected adjacent dots in the grid with the aim of completing a box/square. The player who gets to join the last unconnected adjacent dots that would complete a square unit would gain one point and an extra turn. The actions made by the players in their respective turns would impact each other and cannot be reversed at any point in the game. The player with maximum points will be declared as the winner at the end of the game.

Game Rules and Work:
The game is well specified. All the rules and requirements are well established for the game. To start the game, a grid of unconnected dots with at minimum of 2 players would be required. The grid can be of any M X N size matrix. The players can only join the unconnected dots remaining in the grid. In every turn no more than two dots can be connected, and the connection can be made only between adjacent unconnected dots. Every time a player who completes the fourth side of a square box earns a point and an extra turn to play. Usually the point earned by the player is recorded by placing the player’s initial/symbol in the box completed. The game ends when all dots are connected. The winner is the player with more points recorded on their initial. Since it is an online game, we would like to incorporate a feature letting the player to pause the game at any point and resume it later with preserved game state.

Additional game functionalities:
We would like to include a factor of luck into this game. The aim of the players which is to record more boxes on their initial to maximize their score remains unchanged. To turn this game slightly into a game of chance, we would like to randomly hide a spin wheel behind few of the square boxes. The spin wheel will be revealed in the game only when a player completes the fourth side of the box where it is hidden. The player who completes the hidden spin wheel square box gets to spin the wheel. The spin wheel can giveaway rewards, negatives or can leave the game unchanged. We plan to make the spin wheel with four to six wedges worth extra points or negative points or zero points. The winner is the player who is with maximum points at the end of the game.

Expected challenges:
Since it is a turn-based multiplayer game, and every action made by the players in their respective turns would have effect on each other, the expectation is to have high responsiveness. But generally, considering it’s a client-server architecture there are good chances of encountering delays in the responsiveness to a player’s action. This would impact a player’s perception of the game. Therefore, there might arise a need to implement mechanisms to compensate the lag.
Few more challenges we anticipate is that the game gives the player the luxury of time to make a move, but what if the player takes really long time to decide their move or the player quits the game while the game is still unfinished or the player loses connection to the game. We would also like to have a solution for differentiating between the scenario where player quits the game and the scenario where player pauses the game to resume it later. We wish to gracefully notify the players in such scenarios and address all of them with an efficient solution.